Next up the third and final logical operator we'll see for now the not operator so unlike or or end
where we have two characters Ampersand Ampersand or with or we have pipe pipe with not we have a single
character one exclamation point and it works a little differently.
We don't have a left and a right side like we did with or we have one side we have the other.
Same thing with and not is just going to operate on a single expression and it returns true if that
expression is false.
So we put exclamation point in front of some expression if that expression returns false.
When you have the not in front of it the whole thing is now true kind of negates it.
So here's a couple of very simple examples we've seen no.
Which is a false C value.
When you put an exclamation point in front of it we end up with true not no true not zero true not empty
string true.
Now if we try it with a truth value like forty five we get false now because forty five is truth.
So then not true is false.
Same thing with a string that is truth.
And you can see where I'm going.
We can also use not to negate actual expressions that are not just a single value.
So something like zero equals zero is truth.
It's true when we put the exclamation point that not in front we get false or three less than or equal
to four that is true.
The exclamation point gives us false scenarios where you use this can vary greatly and it's hard to
show all that useful of an example and I'll explain why in just a moment.
All of these operators and or not along with the conditionals themselves if else if and else are really
flexible and there's often a ton of different ways of achieving the exact same logic or the same outcome
but you can write it differently you can use nested things as we've seen you could use and you can combine
certain things with not in order to make them work.
So let's take a look at an example we saw earlier we had the logged in user example where we were trying
to check if a user was logged in or if this variable had a value we wanted to do something.
But now let's flip it and say that we want to check if there is not a logged in user so that we can
boot them off the web page they're in the wrong spot they shouldn't be here.
So if there isn't a logged in user do something.
How would we do that with what we've seen so far without not.
We would do if logged in user and then else is where we would put our code that code down here would
run when there is no logged in user when it's undefined or no empty string.
But if we want to use not if we don't have an otherwise we just want to check if there's not a user.
We could write this if not logged in user we'll come to that log.
And if I run it we end up with.
Get out of here.
But if I change this to now have a value we don't get anything.
So we could have written this as we saw earlier with the regular if put some code in here for when the
user is logged in.
And then in the else put this.
But if we don't have two situations we just want to check if there's not a logged in user.
We could use not.
So here's another very simple example.
Most of these as you've already noticed are quite silly and not they don't seem immediately useful.
But these pieces of logic the tools we're learning I promise they do come into play all the time when
you're creating real applications.
We just don't have those tools yet.
So we're kind of faking it with logged in user or what we're gonna do now.
We'll do something like flavor.
Flavor will be grape.
So we are a online snow cone stand and we mail you snow cones premade using dry ice.
We only have two flavors.
We have grape and we have Cherry So if a user order something that is not grape and it's not cherry
we need to tell them you can't do that.
So we have a couple of different ways of doing this.
We could check if flavor is not equal to grape and flavor is not equal to Cherry.
We'll come to that log.
We don't have that flavor.
So that's one way of doing it.
If I change this to watermelon for example refresh the page we don't have that flavor but if we wanted
to write it another way just kind of what I'm getting at here we have a lot of options.
We could also say if flavor equals grape or flavor equals cherry and then negate that entire thing with
piranhas around it.
We would read this as if not flavor is grape or flavors cherry.
So this logic is basically the same thing we wrote up here the same exact outcome for it's true in the
same scenarios and false in the same scenarios but we've written it differently.
I definitely prefer.
Well I think I prefer this one.
It's easier.
Fewer operators.
But this is totally valid.
And remember the way it works is that we have or.
Which is in parentheses.
So if one of these is true the entire thing is true.
And that would mean flavor is grape or flavor is cherry.
So if flavor is grape this becomes true.
This doesn't matter because it's an or.
So the whole thing becomes true like that and then we negate that.
So the whole thing becomes false and then this code would not run.
But if we had flavor was watermelon for example this is false this is false.
So this whole or becomes false and then we negate that false which gives us true.
So let's make sure it works.
OK comment this one out.
Well consider log.
We only have grape and Cherry refresh.
Right now we're using watermelon.
Is that right.
We only have grape and cherry.
I changed it to grape.
No problem.
We don't get that counseled outlook.
So it's not the most riveting example but I wanted to show that we can rewrite things to different ways.
I still prefer this one but not gives us flexibility and sometimes it is actually useful.
But I just wanted to show we have flexibility all of this stuff can be rewritten multiple ways.
There's still further ways we could rewrite this.
We could nest instead.
But I won't get into that for now.
So that is not the third logical operator and or and not.